---
layout: post
title: "Oxygen: What is it?"
date: 2019-11-15
---

	Last Tuesday, I had the opportunity to attend the Humanities Forum, “Oxygen: What is it?”, presented by James E. McLellan, professor emeritus at Stevens. Before arriving, I made sure to read the abstract of the presentation to have some context about the discourse. To my surprise, the abstract revealed that much of the presentation pertained to the idea that science is “constituted of stories we tell about nature and with the key corollary some stories are better than other stories.” Intrigued by the seemingly philosophical approach to a scientific topic (at a tech school no less), I entered the room of professors and scholars to find out what I could possibly glean from the words of the esteemed historian of science. 
	Professor McLellan began his presentation by establishing the dynamism of stories: he noted people’s explanations of the world around them will always be prone to change due to the endless investigation of novel ideas and theories. During this time, he distinguished himself from a philosopher, stating his purpose to be to provide the different perceptions of science through a historical context rather than to postulate his own theories regarding modern science. Thus he began his longue duree explanation of the concept of oxygen. 
As it turns out, people have been questioning the act of breathing since before the advent of the first ancient civilizations. Many cultures associated an energy with breathing, including Hinduism and Buddhism, point to prana as the energy that can be absorbed through breath (at this point, the professor had the audience take a deep breath just so we could at the very least experience the therapeutic effect taking in a deep breath often induces). He also discussed the examination of different materials in alchemy, the idea that the Holy Spirit communicates to people through the medium of air and mentioned several religions that utilize some aspect of chemistry in their explanations of their theories (indeed, many will find that religions often utilize their theories to explain chemistry, but the point of the matter is that chemistry became a subject of curiosity and investigation). Fast forward a few-hundred years, and we end up at the chemical revolution. McLellan went on to explain the emergence of phlogiston chemistry, pioneered by scientist Joseph Priestley, followed by the discovery of Mercurius calcinatus which was a red powder that resulted from heating up mercury. This discovery was of particular importance because when this red powder was reheated, it turned into mercury again… but this time also released a gas: oxygen. However, it took a few more years to reach a consensus regarding “oxygen.” Carl Chelle termed the gas “fire air,” not too far a cry considering the evidence at hand during the time. French scientist Antoine Lavoisier termed it “eminently respirable air” before naming it oxygène. He then discussed further complications arising from the understanding of oxygen and molecules in general because of the ongoing debate concerning the structure of atoms, Einstein shocking the world of science with his theory of relativity, then finally concluding this part of the discussion by mentioning quantum physics, dark matter, and the ever elusive string theory and how these may revolutionize the way we approach molecular chemistry as a whole.
	Though this narration may seem to be particularly useful only to staunch Jeopardy fans, the professor had a purpose in running through the chronology of how we ended up with the modern definition of oxygen. He showed that after every establishment of a belief, there rose a new idea with its own evidence to prove something different and that ultimately, science is what we are aware of based on current perception. As better and better stories come to light, scientists, and the following world (because let’s face it, we’re all following scientists unless we’re scientists ourselves), adopt them and replace the incumbent beliefs. There were many people in the audience who had qualms on the wording of this reasoning, specifically the qualitative diction McLellan used such as “story” and “better” as opposed to quantitative diction used by most scientists such as “model” and “accurate.” After a surprisingly fervorous question and answer segment of the presentation, I discerned that the true difference in opinion is found in whether a person believes science is tangible or intangible. It’s fitting that chemists will agree that science is tangible study because they are usually working toward exploiting some physical property of matter in order to discover, prove, or learn something. It is also fitting that a historian would argue for the intangibility of chemistry because historians are meant to be aware of changes in communities (here specifically the scientific community) in relation to the history of such changes. Moreover, chemists and historians will naturally disagree on how to interpret scientific breakthroughs in terms of teaching; chemists will be predisposed to consider the practicality and usefulness of the material they teach (one professor in the room pointed out how he had a responsibility to ensure his students understood stoichiometry before having a conversation about the different perspectives of science), whereas historians of science may teach scientific breakthroughs relative to the preceding ones. 
	Essentially, my takeaway from the forum was not that we can only either be of the opinion that science consists of stories or facts, rather that there are two separate ways to consider science. We may lean toward either argument based on our interests, careers, or surrounding environments, but this does not nullify the opposing one. Whether it is more pressing that we learn stoichiometry or the origins of science to our everyday needs, we may find use in considering the alternative point of view in that at the very least, we have expanded our minds. 
